## v0.2.0 - 2025-07-22

### Added

- Tasks and task logs for every database operation.
- `parent_id`, `node_name`, `host_id`, and `instance_id` fields to task API entities.
- Support for performing database backups to a mounted file system using the posix repository type via pgBackRest.
- Enabled volume validation during database creation and update to verify that specified extra_volumes paths exist and are accessible.
- APIError type for simpler, more consistent API errors.
- Summaries and groups to API endpoints in OpenAPI spec.
- Introduced restart-instance API to allow users to manually trigger a restart of a specific Postgres instance.
- Added support for attaching database containers to additional Docker networks to enable routing via Traefik and other custom setups.
- Added ability to apply arbitrary labels to the database service/container.
- Add support to disable direct database port exposure on the host in Swarm deployments.
- `remove-host` endpoint.
- Added scheduling functionality in the Control Plane.

### Changed

- Create, update, delete, and restore API responses to include task information.
- `initiate-database-backup` operation name to `backup-database-node`
- Task logs entries from log lines to structured log entries.
- Renamed `inspect` endpoints to `get`: `get-cluster`, `get-host`, `get-database-task`.
- Introduced restore_options as a structured map, and renamed extra_options to backup_options for consistency.
- Moved existing API endpoints under a `/v1` prefix.
- Allow human-readable IDs in all user-specified ID fields, including `cluster_id`, `host_id`, `database_id` and backup repository IDs.
- Censor sensitive fields, such as user passwords or cloud credentials, in all API responses. Likewise, these fields can be omitted from update requests if they're not being modified.
- Updated `pgedge` images to 5.0.0-1
- Moved pgEdge and Control Plane images to ghcr.io
- `control-plane` base image from `scratch` to `gcr.io/distroless/static-debian12` for CA certificates

### Removed

- Unused fields from API specification.

### Fixed

- Delay when resuming workflows after a restart.
- Database operation errors when instance IPs change after restarting.
- Method to determine default IPv4 address to always return IPv4.
